I like to sort of describe some of what I do is multi fractal social psychology, not, not like traditional social psychology, but I see groups where others don't and so I've sort of taken to seeing multiple people as well as single people as well as single organisms as themselves swarms.
I got into this for reasons of things like embodied cognition, and that sort of led me to start looking into this cascade metaphor for what what fluid systems are doing when they're engaged and embodied in their surroundings.
So, um, so, um, so we sort of, so a short version of embodied cognition is sort of like is the idea that we definitely have to have something on our minds before we act, but the action is very important.
So we do have these old plans, old information, but every time we're leaping out into the world, we sort of stir up new, new stimuli, new sensations.
We also are always getting new information every time we move. So we sort of, we, we, we, we act to think, and we don't just think to act.
And so this idea, I think there's a lot of ways to take embodied cognition. And there's a lot of ways to sort of think of, for instance, the, the body as a puppet of the brain and sort of the brain sort of greedily collects all the information but uses this interesting shaped puppet.
But I think that it could go, it could be a little more fluid and a little less, a little less sort of centralized and it could have a lot to do with sort of the, how the fluid shape of our actions are impacting how we learn about our world and our, and so the body might be playing much more of a
role than sort of traditionally thought in, in psych.
So all these sort of interactions that the body has with its, its surroundings, they unfold at multiple scales of time. And so, so according to the math that I've seen at least it's sort of that that's led me to sort of suggest that the shapes that our movements take are cascading and you can see cascading forms
throughout our physiology. But so, but I want to sort of see how far that goes through our actual measurable behaviors. And the cascading shapes.
So, so far as I've been able to see invite a multi fractal geometrical model so if I want to understand what we're thinking new, based on how we're acting.
So my approach has been to sort of look at the shapes of the movement in terms of multi fractal geometry, and I'll be unpacking some of what that means.
But the idea here is that the multi fractal shapes of this sort of swarm of bodily movement can reveal interactions across scale that underpin what the swarm can know. So, and so I'll, I'll, I've started with sort of single organisms but I've sort of gone into other model systems.
I've seen multiple people, but also other organisms where it's much easier to see a swarm all at once. And the swarm metaphor is a little easier to sell so it's hard to in psych to to sort of portray an individual organism as a swarm, because so many people are sort of invested in this idea of all all events,
are going towards the service of the central nervous system of the brain. So what I'm proposing here is a multi fractal route to swarm intelligence, where multi fractality in what follows is operationalizing the interactions across scales that I think, and this is where
I'm still sort of still still learning still sort of taking a lot of feedback of my own through my own steps. I think this characterizes swarm intelligence and I think this is one way to understand how swarms can act adaptively.
So the, the opener, I do welcome any questions along the way. So I will try to pause at the end of each slide. If anyone has any questions, I'm happy to take them so what's the best way for me to, I guess you could just call out, I guess, if there's something and I'll happily zip back.
Okay.
So any questions.
Well, so one way to sort of start digging into this idea of this cascade is to sort of, it sort of schematize a body in action. So we could think of lots of these at me so the brain does
matter for setting off these sort of shed these massive chains of progressively smaller events. So you do get these sort of grounds well of activity in the brain and that can sort of have propagating influence down a spinal cord through flexors and extensors of muscle pairings, and
the muscle activity in turn induces these fluctuations onwards to the periphery that are actually so given the speed of, of, of electrochemical transmission, these sort of distant body parts are actually so far that the brain probably doesn't sort of specify most of what they do.
So much of this periphery is sort of acting relatively independently, and it's being coached along by these more central aspects and so the, these fluctuations, crucially for Cascades are spreading out anywhere into progressively smaller fluctuations so they sort of
they're, they're, they're dying out breaking down, but they keep spreading. So there's not necessarily a principled center so we can start this conversation from the brain but we can also sort of more this organism in a context that's full of important informational
gradients such as time and clocks and tools, and the, the, the, the ground surface. And so each of these parts that I've circled can be sort of key players that end up reshaping this fluid cascade that sort of is, is rolling around
amongst them. And so what we get is this intricate
spreading out of fluctuations that are essentially turbulence so they're these turbulent structures where these large fluctuations can sort of get smaller fluctuations, which then in turn can sort of scaffold and constrain the ongoing large fluctuations and so we do have I believe it feels strange
to just sort of start talking about how we have turbulence here because I, I definitely don't have a physics PhD, but it's looks like what turbulence is in all the models that I've been able to understand so that sort of that's so so when so I come to this through sort of the
subfield of movement science where they, they, they have a big problem of understanding how, how a single organism can move all of its degrees of freedom around and that this is sort of an ongoing challenge as to how, how it could be that all these different parts get moved around
and so one way it could be is that we have these emergent synergies that are organized hierarchically. And so I, I try to portray that like so. But any questions.
So where do central pattern generators fit into that that scheme.
Central pattern generators. They are.
They remain controversial for one thing they it there's no that there is no necessary need for anything to be devoid of its own resonant frequency, or its own timing structure.
And for the whole organism to work you you do need a fluid hierarchical organization that central pattern generators can be can can participate in but they're they, they are not sufficiently global to show the organismic coordination that we get across the whole body.
So we can sort of envision this cascade across different time scales as well and that becomes crucial for the analysis that I'll be using. So we could think about this intention to run as waxing and waning across time, and that could be a relatively long time scale as we're sort of rushing through an
airport, say, and so at the longer scales of time there is the more slowly changing surroundings, which is sort of our airport gate, full of concessions.
And so you might slow down if you if you're suddenly feeling hungry and you smell something tasty and you're looking around for where to go. And so all of a sudden you start triggering the sort of medium time scales that sit within your long term goals of getting to the gate.
And you're sort of ready to sort of compromise and you start in exhibiting all these sort of finer scale fluctuations where you bring online new physiological events as you sort of take a pause.
And your physiology kicks into gear, sort of investing in this distraction from your long term goal. So you have these very fine short time scales.
And then you can sort of get get sort of kicked back into gear by another to you that sort of reminds you of where you have to go and then you might not have time so then your adrenaline starts going so you have this ongoing cascade, and it can eventually bring you to a happy
conclusion. But what so as the as a movement scientists sort of unpacking this, this choreography, the trick is that there's no sort of quiescent timescale there's no sort of so so you don't get anything that's sort of quiescent it's a it's a pretty thoroughly unstable
non stationary system, non ergodic as well. So as we consider ever finer scales of time we don't actually stop finding variability we just uncover more, more subtle variation.
And so for the, so you can base, you can sort of make your whole successful research program, based on any one of these levels but the thing that keeps me up at night is sort of how to express how these things interact across different times.
So how, how, how do we contextualize any of these, so that they help us get a job done. And so, from, so, so for me, that that's where multifactile geometry becomes most useful.
So, any questions about this layout of timescales and the interact interactions among them.
So, what are you measuring the jitterness or the trough and marks.
So, so, so I will be getting to that this is just sort of a schematic of sort of how we are a multi scaled system that that has multiple observables within it so I've measured many of these things.
The tangent to run is sort of a schematic hand wavy thing to sort of relate over the idea that we do have a waxing and waning and how, how we're engaged with the task.
Many of these other observables, you can take any single one of them and the catch is that they each one of them actually shows an imprint of all these different interactions so so you can care very much about which you're interested in because they each reflect a different point of contact.
But actually, you can also find that all of these things are all these sort of one dimensional observables will actually carry the imprint of these complex nonlinear action interactions across scale.
Okay, so, so schematically again this is just sort of what we're doing in fractal analysis is we're taking a standard deviation across multiple different timescales.
The really fractal analysis sounds sort of new fangled and weird but it is actually sort of just a generalization of standard diffusion modeling.
So this is where you're looking at the relationship of standard deviation with time scale, and you're estimating this alpha here as, which is an exponent there so you're using usually logarithmically scaled axes to estimate that exponent as a slope.
So the, the interesting thing about these relationships is that that the logarithmic scaling sort of makes planar to the eye the fact that that there is this scale invariant relationship that you can find across multiple timescales.
And the power law sort of in a mathematical indication that these, these relationships diverge and don't converge to any sort of asymptote.
And what we are doing here is estimating that slope alpha to estimate the exponent on the left side, and that that that's that exponent is effectively a dimension and so, and it's, so if you had a Euclidean system, you would you could, you could, you could look at these
components and get from them the, the standard Euclidean dimensions that we know and love.
But so what this will do for us in what follows this sort of answer a question about how strong relationships are across timescale.
And so we can use this operationally to to sort of test the strength of of nesting relationships as they support perception and action.
And anytime I say multi fractal, which is often that is just to say that this is not this organism is not like a monolith that actually embodies multiple of these.
And so in effect, any one of these observable time series actually has within it, multiple scaling relationships and this is sort of, this has been, this sort of has been in the works operationally for about 50 years people
have been doing this kind of modeling, and it often shows up in like geophysics and meteorology, where they're interested in sort of turbulent flows in in the weather, or in fluid flow.
Any questions.
I have a question here.
Can you extrapolate this, and what would probably the next higher order of organization be or does this somehow resonate with something in society like a group or that way.
I will be making the case in subsequent slides that this, so this capacity to find scale and variant relationships, and sort of describe them with these, these exponents here that it does actually it, it, it, it does seem to resonate with or predict
group memberships or capacities for different parts of the body to coordinate with each other or with the task environment so yeah so there is. So the scaling up does go somewhere and does become, I think, useful for for talking about the social kinds of
coordination that go on in any kind of swarm like system, swarm like system.
Thanks.
Great. So, um, so I'm sort of also working from a biological standpoint which is very systems ish so in developmental psychology, starting in like the 70s, they started to talk about this framework called probabilistic epigenesis and this is sort of like the epigenesis that is more sort of plainly in the
but the, the probabilistic.
Adjective here was sort of I think the sort of the, the, the developmental psychobiologists trying to understand how these could be sort of less deterministic more random. And so they started it.
Like, trying to formalize these ideas in terms of these multiple layers, all of which it are, are interacting at all these different scales of time they're going up and down the scales. And so you have sort of multiple layers and some people would call these cascade models and some
people wouldn't, but I was always sort of seeing in this schematic some sort of glimmer of what the physicists were talking about in terms of turbulence.
So all these participating variables crucially are not just sort of like solid lines they are fluctuating. And so you do have sort of these relationships that can wax and wane.
And so I've been sort of, that's sort of one of my inspirations going forward to sort of try to see what's how we can elaborate this idea and sort of think about it in more fluid terms, where we could use multifactile analysis to model the exchange of cascade
dynamics across a coordination, which could show us how symbol like structures can emerge or dissolve and sort of individual selves or others could also evolve fluidly within the same swarm.
And so we could sort of elaborate that idea in sort of social biological terms as sort of an overarching social context which would sort of serve as like the environment.
Or as a part of that environment and then an identity sort of forks out of the relationship of a body with its context or in a component agent within a cloud of agents for instance and then you have the behavior also sort of spreading out of this body gene interaction that's also
unfolded by the context and so you sort of, I think in practice, the sort of the traditional schematics here about sort of developmental systems is actually a lot more messy in practice if we tried to like sketch that out so that's what I'm attempting down there at the bottom of the slide.
And so, so I sort of wanted sort of a way to think about sort of how we could sort of treat swarms and food coordination within a single body as this, this interesting cascade model that that the psychologist had been sort of tinkering with for for a while now.
So, how to unpack that I wanted to sort of take that idea and apply it to this idea of a multi degree of freedom organism or system as it can become a swarm of several organisms.
And I wanted to take that sort of biological spider web there. And so Gilbert Gottlieb sort of the, the, the, the, the founder of this particular schematics idea so he wasn't so he wasn't alone in this intellectual stream but this idea of probabilistic epigenesis he was not a mathematician.
So I never got the chance to like check with them like how do you think this resonates with what you're doing, but he, I've, I've heard from scholars who work with them that he wouldn't have minded my particular blend which for for the time being has been vector auto regression which is a sort of a very bare bones causal model.
That allows you to sort of fit short lag relationships between multiple cotemporaneous variables, and then I, it, it, it sort of fits sort of the, the single variables relationships with its future cells, and then it's also able to extrapolate the effects of each of those participating variables on each
other at the, at similar legs. And that's sort of that using that has been very useful for me to sort of understand how we can take multiple measures of the same system.
And so we could look at head sway or hand movements and eye movements and sort of put it all in one sort of family of endogenous variables, and then imbue that with multifractal fluctuations where what we're doing there is we're we're sort of the participating variables are
the estimates of multifractal structure. So this could be in a way to elaborate these sort of systems bio perspectives such as probabilistic epigenesis.
And so in that way we could sort of imbue this schematic with a little bit more fluid structure kind of like what you would find in a turbulent model of development.
Any questions.
All right, so we, we can sort of do that. So the actual math of this is to look at standard deviation and look at how standard deviation grows as a function of time with that exponent alpha.
Now we can apply this to heterogeneous systems where you have multiple different parts, multiple different sizes of events, processing at different rates. And so you would get different kinds of diffusion within the same organism, or the same swarm.
And so you can sort of elaborate the fractal analysis on the left for heterogeneous systems on the right, where you can basically take that that initial time series on the left, and you can use this q filter to basically accentuate small events and crush out big events.
And conversely, you can sort of increase that parameter. So the other side of to there and you can you can emphasize large events at the expense of smaller events and so you can basically take a single time series.
And so long as you have heterogeneous events, heterogeneous sized events, you could potentially get multiple different temporal profiles and so see that large events are evolving differently than smaller events.
And you can estimate a fractal parameter for each, each potential event size that you could estimate.
And so what you get as, as I was pointing out before is you get multiple of these, these, these scaling relationships, and so you get a multi fractal generalized alpha.
And now, most fractal analysis will estimate that alpha for for a q of two.
And so much of what follows is is sort of asking the question of, could different size fluctuations actually show an influence on one another. So could you actually find that large events and small events are are are buffeting the intermediate
that have been emphasized by, by monofractal analysis so this so generalizing this exponent allows us to sort of talk about how large events or small events could be bumping up against each other, and whether or not that those relationships matter for
the intelligence of the human organisms swarm or multiple organisms together swarming any questions about that analysis.
And so the vector at auto regression is serving the role of testing whether or not these different event sizes are actually influencing one another.
I'm a psychologist by training and so one of the sort of things that we study there is executive function. And so this involves the ability to selectively attend to one of many dimensions.
And so they gave people a card sort task so card sort task involves sort of having the participant, look at a number of cards out of a deck, and they have to sort them and so the rule can change as to which, which attribute they should be sorting
by animal ornament or color for instance, so they might get the purple cow with the glasses and, and the question is which other of those three up there, should they sort this card with by color by accessory or by animal.
And so participants were randomly assigned to one of two conditions, one condition, they, they only got an explicit instruction of the rule, and so they would, they would be told, you have to sort by animal, and then they would, you know, sort by animal.
And then, in another case, they were asked to induce the rule and this was slightly more challenging. So they had to sort of figure out by feedback.
Which pile they should be sorting into and then the rule would change and so we would ask them to have, have 10 subsequent correct trials before they had mastered the rule.
And so we looked at hand movements. So we asked sort of what sort of structure would there be in the hand movements used to sort the cards that might give us a window on sort of the the flexibility of the the cognitive system as it moves through this task and as it
learns to master a new rule. So the hand movements. We, we took three dimensional hand position measured at 60 Hertz with the magnetic motion capture system, and we sort of took that continuous movement and we use the sliding window to basically
estimate many different fractal exponents of a cross time.
And so what we found is that if you looked at these, these, these, the windows these epochs, then you would see that the explicit condition on the way to mastery participants would show hand movements that basically de fractalized to, to, to,
to going to work on the way to mastering the, the, the, the rule. On the other hand, if they had to induce through we saw this interesting perhaps parabolic shape, we had seen this in another task.
Using an insight problem and found a similar path basically that that having to sort of figure out the rule on their own, seemed to occasion the sort of this, this inflation, and then then decrease of the alpha.
So, for, for the purposes of the multi fractal swarm question, we wanted for our next step to ask, well, are the changes here that we're seeing that we had seen in other insight problem type tasks.
And this is due to the contribution of multiple sized events so is this person this the hand movement, is it buffeted by events of multiple different sizes and is that important to the trajectory that we can see so reliably in the hand movements.
Any questions about that.
Okay, so, you can basically think about this.
These, the multi fractal generalization of that earlier point, in terms of this sort of manifold where you can see Q on the left is this, this dimension that can basically change which size event, the, the fractal exponent is emphasizing and then on the right or the
horizontal you have epoch which is sort of the, the time and the task. And so, the fact that we got this drop off on the vertical axis was evidence that the sorting hand motions are multi fractal.
And there was this decreasing alpha with greater Q. And we, we sort of can can situate our previous slides finding on the manifold like so with that pale curved arrow.
And so you get this drop off at the end so we use vector auto regression to basically test unique effects among these bi directionally interacting variables along that multi fractal manifold.
And so we had wanted to understand these two relationships here on the, the bottom right.
And so we, we wanted to know whether, whether alphas for in different parts of this heterogeneous system, we're contributing to this so so if the body was a cascade then we should find this interaction between large events and small events.
And so we basically wanted to know would, would, would fractal parameters from before lead to later changes at the, the Q equals to alpha.
And so what we found using vector auto regression was that indeed, there were unique effects of the alpha Q equals for an alpha Q negative four.
So for large events and small events respectively, they both in the induction condition evoked later increases in the alpha Q equals to there was a, a, a condition effect where if we just gave people the rule, then the, the effects within that cascade
seem to be the reverse so the, the alpha for, for large and small events if a lighter decreases in the observe.
So what we were, what we were confirming here was that you, you don't just sort of have a monolithic fractal system that somehow resets across time and sensitively to task.
Task constraints so the task constraints somehow speak to the, the, the moving hand through a cascade of events where these large events and small events which you can.
Can it estimates separate fractal dimensions, they, these, the, these different sized events showed a different pattern of interaction within the same movement system, and that, that was evidence to us that we were, it was sort of beginning
to see that we had a cascade dynamics that would change based on task. Any questions about that.
Okay, so, so just.
So, so then we're sort of going to move from this executive function task into some other kinds of tasks so here.
We've also looked at coordination behavior so if you're interested in movement systems and moving coordination, you, you might see a lot of research on timing behavior so the ability to keep time.
So here a beeping metronome, and eventually you start encoding the regularity and you build up an internal model of when to tap next and start anticipating the next beat.
But so then we started to ask what would happen if you made those intervals.
If you made them actually mathematically chaotic. In that case, it's, it's math, I mean, so if you're a, if you're, if you're coming up with a prediction based on any sort of linear model, you're going to fail at this so there's, it's linearly unpredictable.
So we built this using the Ekata map.
And here's what an example metronome interval series looked like. So as you can see there, the, the interval durations are, are, were scaled to hover between about one and a half and one second.
And there was some variability within that range.
And here's what human participants looked like. So these are the intervals between their taps, and you can see they're sort of they're in a good ballpark they're, they're, they're following along that so their, their task is to tap along with the onset so not after or not before, try to keep in time.
And so this was very challenging, and it didn't sort of submit to a lot of the standard decompositions of this task and in the rest of the literature because sometimes people would omit to tap they would tap twice.
They would sort of so it was very, it was very difficult to know what to do with this.
So what we found initially was that the fractal scaling actually matches. So, so the alpha of the human behavior seemed to match to sort of tune to the task.
And so this was sort of at least sort of in the absence of any, any predictability, it seemed like okay so so these, these fractal bodies seem to be able to do, however, they were sort of increasing or crushing their fractal scaling and the executive function
they seem to be able to absorb sort of environmental structure. And so you could think of the human and the metronome is like a very, a very tiny swarm, where one, the human is trying to absorb the information from the metronome.
And it's a one way street, but it's an interesting one way street.
This. So the initial sort of fractal matching is interesting but it there's a lot of trivial ways in which that could be true. There's a lot of ways to sort of simulate how people could just be in some sort of Gaussian ballpark.
They could be I mean so if you flipped the metronome series backwards you would get actually the same fractal scaling and so they could be doing it completely wrong.
What's more interesting we found was that, so it's not just sort of them sort of tapping in any order that will satisfy the alpha. What we found more particularly was that there's a particular layout of different fractal scaling
components within that time series so you can find a similar sort of multifractal diversity of event sizes with their own temporal structures. And so the range of alpha was actually well mimicked by the human participants so without any capacity to predict, they are actually
in gendering the same, the same multifractal structure. And so multifractal structure I'm abbreviating here and as MFS and I'm defining that for the time being, as the range and alpha so alpha, you can estimate what's called a multifractal spectrum, and to date the
most prevalently published descriptor of that is the multifractal spectrum width. And so for our purposes, I'm not going to bother you with the other parts of the spectrum, it's the range of alpha that characterizes the width of that spectrum.
So the range of alphas here were better suited in the, so the human participant data showed a range of alpha that matched the original range of alpha in the unpredictable metronome, and it did that better than it matched any sort of linear models of the metronome.
So it did not look like this diversity of alphas was reducible to some sort of linear approximation of multifractality in the metronome. Any questions about that?
And so we can sort of like, introvert all of that. And so I did some work looking at infant spontaneous kicking. So early in life, a good indicator of sort of a healthy nervous system is some degree of spontaneous kicking, twitching,
wriggling. And so I was curious, does spontaneous kicking reveal any sort of exploratory process? There is this story and has been for about 40 years that like these early in life kicks and wriggles and stuff are is the body learning how to use and explore the gravitational field and the surfaces around it.
And so you do get this idea of sort of like a mind phishing for information and casting out and bringing information back in. So I was curious, can you find any sort of relationship in the multifractalities, not between a person and a metronome, but now between different parts of this movement system.
So we had ankle, knee and hip, going angle information.
And so I was curious how those, those variations would flow upstream. And so in a sense, what I'm trying to do is an elaboration of the metronome study where instead of a person tapping along with the chaotic metronome.
And so I have here, or I was was, was, was, I was curious if what I had was a series of chaotic metronome is sort of in training to each other, but with a bias or an inclination for the flow of multifractality to be upstream.
And so, um, what I would see in the data was sort of these joint angles that look like so. And so I wanted to be able to model to test statistically like what what happens when you increase multifractality at the ankle would you get an upstream change in the knee, for instance, and then at the hip.
So that upstream flow is what I was most curious about. And so I wanted to sort of figure out how to sort of test that without sort of like squinting at plots and hand waving basically and so vector order regression was was useful tool there and did in fact confirm that there is this upstream flow from ankle to knee to hip.
Um, so what what's nice about this vector order regression approaches that it treats all variables as predictors and outcomes alike so it's so it's so it allows all these variables to be endogenous.
You can fit exogenous variables as well, but I've never been as interested in those so I haven't really sort of tinkered as much with that.
These are linear systems so the, the, the vector order regression is a linear framework so it doesn't sort of acknowledge like the potential for something to become exogenous and so I sort of haven't tinkered a whole lot with that.
I've been most interested in sort of like letting all these variables be endogenous and seeing how things how things interact.
So, what this approach does allow is sort of it allows all, I mean, so, written into the assumptions that allows all items capable capability for sending and absorbing multifactile structure as you might hope if the swarm was sort of fully open and decentralized.
Any questions about any of this.
Okay, so I'm trying. So, so basically what's going on here is I'm, I'm sort of trying to broaden the, the, the formal foothold, or being able to say yes, that there are turbulent flows here where the, where, where the, where the multifactile structure is propagating through a body.
And so then, so it's as it turns out, with any time we're focusing on any single task like you can take the, the motion capture of the point of the body that's doing the task that's sort of pressed up against the test constraints.
So you could be like focusing attention and that could be your entire job and you can look at eye movements, or, or, or hand wheeling of a block. And so, but then anytime you're sort of bringing fractal structure to that, that direct contact that sort of hand on the handle of the object that you're holding
the eye movements against the screen that you're looking at the multifactile structure implicit in that or that exploration is writing on this whole body full of multifactile structures so like it's not so it's not that so it's not that one multifactile
spectrum actually speaks for the whole body. As we saw the infant case, and, and it's possible to extrapolate with the adult bodies which are more cooperative, we can start sort of estimating how, how multifactility changes for different parts of these
these multiple degrees of freedom that had been so challenging to sort of, to, to, to, to, to, to, to, to, to, to, to, excuse me, separate along. And so anytime we're focusing our attention on a task.
We are doing so on the background of this big distributed body that's humming with all this multifactile activity. And so, so these multifactile movements coordinate information across the body so whatever we're doing in that task and at the part that we're paying attention
to that's sort of in the background of this whole task context and the context of how we're situated and and and poise in that circumstance.
And so we can also look at and now here's here's a second organism.
We can look at speech and the use of language, and we can show that our perception of language has it depends on a meeting of fractal structures and so in fact, you can look at
each data so amplitude wave forms of spoken language.
And so you can find that mean that so the, the, the air that we expel from our mouth is wonderfully turbulent. It has all this intricate structure.
And you can unpack that linguistically in terms of formants and phonemes and that's really cool but I, but, but I'm also interested in how you can look at in terms of multifactile structure and it has all this
interesting multifactile structure that that can then help the listener understand and then also sort of can engage them as movement system as movement systems participating in the same conversation as it were.
So, so it's not just sort of a signal from from a source to a receiver, it's there's a whole full bodied sort of backdrop for all the stuff and that's actually not less backdrop and more participative.
And so, so, so, so the multifactile.
Multifactile movement is actually supporting information transfer in sort of their bones perceptual terms but also the abstract link link linguistic case.
Now, so the, the, it feels weird. I'll acknowledge to think about listening as having any sort of movement because that seems completely passive.
But so what you, what you can have is, you can sort of give people a listening task where they have to press a button to get the next word that they get to hear and so they'll, they can sort of tap to ask for the next word.
And so you can look at that movement time series of button taps to read sort of how engaged the listener is and so and that that has its own multifactile structure that predicts how well they remember what they heard.
So, so, so, so we can quickly sort of generalize from one point of the body to the whole body and then to some small groups.
And, and it seems to perpetually it's it still seems to be that multifactile structure can sort of predict and support the engagement of multiple different agents working together.
Any questions about this.
All right, so here is an actual swarm so I sort of got tired of sort of waving my hands and saying an organism has multi degrees, multiple degrees of freedom and it's kind of swarming.
So I started taking organisms that actually were swarms that everyone could agree were swarms and so we have the colonies which are actually the biologists so so I didn't need any psychologists to do this they they called these be colonies super organisms.
And they've got a lot of integrity to them as as a colony, without any disrespect to the individual sort of integrity of the individual bees so that there's a hierarchy but it's suffused with interdependence.
So there's role switching without what we can see as direct communication individual bees also show quite a bit of independence, they scout for new places and then they'll come campaign to the group for sort of choosing their new places for for the next outpost of the colony.
So there's group decision making that looks for quorum rather than consensus so there's actually a lot of nuance.
And, and I'm speaking to a group that that is specializing in swarm intelligence side, I don't mean to preach to the choir here I'm sure everyone here may or may know a lot more than I do about this.
But what I found was a data set where they had individual be movements measured in five different colonies to are enclosed and three were open.
And so they had little RFID tags, and then they also had basically a card swipe for the, I mean, glorified card swipe for the bees, where you had an RFID reader appended to the hive.
And so every time the bee went in and out that the RFID tag would get swiped. And so there's a timestamp and an identifying marker on each of the bees.
So what I found is sort of multifactile structure of the individual movement is one of the best predictors of colony membership. And so what I tested this in was was a neural network.
Multinomial regression that basically took descriptive statistics, as well as multifactile spectrum with and also a T test comparing that spectrum with to the spectrums for linear surrogates to sort of test how, how important the non linearity of this aspect was.
And so it sort of gave me a reassuring existence proof that yes, in fact, it was, it was sort of, it did at least predict. I don't know about cause because I didn't control it, but it's a good predictor of, so it's also as if the swarm might put an imprint on an individual bees activity.
And so it's participating in a group gives it a slightly different multifactile structure than bees and in the other colonies. That was sort of the idea here.
So this was sort of another step towards sort of finding multifactile structure in swarms and then seeing some sort of indication that multifactile structure did actually co occur with if not support the group coordination.
Any questions about that?
Yeah, I have a question.
Sure.
Hi, I'm fine.
So for humans, as you mentioned, like speech patterns, now you're talking about the bees of the fractal identity tag almost. So the question comes to mind to me is does the fractal patterns you see in human speech, are they entirely out of our conscious control, or can they?
Yeah, I love this question. And I don't, if everything else that felt autonomic, like heart rate and all this, they always seem sort of beyond our control. I have not done the experiments trying to instruct people on sort of training their alphas.
But I would love to. And I think that's sort of like a wonderful entailment of these ideas if they hold sufficient experimental water and they are actually sort of doing that job.
But yeah, so I don't have any idea as to whether it's explicit. It seems to be moored as far as we know into sort of what could be nicer is like a simpler task context. It's like do this job.
And you don't understand all the stuff that goes on under the hood. But it's not like if you start thinking about tying your shoes, you can actually get confused because it becomes so background.
But I would love to sort of look at how explicitly we can get people to guide that. So I think that's a great question. Thank you.
One short follow up is that data side, the conscious aspect of side, is it more about humans about kind of like your trained speech patterns? Or is it and or is it influenced heavily by your current emotional state?
I'm sure emotions have have something to do with it. I don't have that information. But I did. But I, but it, but in that study, the thing, one thing I didn't tell you about is that I had one condition receive text to speech synthesize speech.
And so it wasn't a human speaker. And so there, but, and there was a different use of, of the multifactile structure off the top of my head, I can't remember what exactly that was, but, but there is a, it, the, the, that difference was found in it.
So the, the, the difference in speaker human or machine would did sort of pan out to a difference in how people use the multifactility structure in this in the speech. So, so yeah, so I think there's a lot of further further research to do there.
Thanks.
Thank you.
So I wanted to get on to slime mold, which so this is an example of another swarm that we wanted to tackle. And so this is a video of a lot of discernible amoeba racing around to aggregation or non aggregation sites.
And so, so this is for 540 slides of an image taken such that each pixel is between one and three micrometers.
And you can see that as, as, as you already know from, from, from your labs research, these are wonderful organisms that can glom together, and then sort of plant seeds for the next generation.
We're about to get together here into their larger structures.
I don't think we get to see the full slug here but we're seeing like a detail of them.
So we, so, so my colleague and I were interested in sort of how these structures, how these structures might or might not reflect cascade dynamics and so we saw a potential to use the spatial series here of the images and do multifactile analysis on that so you can basically
So it's applying the same principles to time to space now and so you're looking at pixel intensity in the, the grayscale.
So we're, we're, we're, so, so does anyone need any primer on Dicty or is, can I assume that we all, all know about Dicty here.
All right, so I'm going to race ahead then. So we have
the precision like so we selected three aggregation and three non aggregation sites for each of these frames and the time in between was about 0.5
or the, the sampling rate was 0.5 hertz. So the selections that we picked were squares of 330 micrometers squared.
I'm going to come back to this slide but I want to show you what those slices look like.
Okay, so here we have the non aggregation sites 123 and the aggregation sites, 456. And so you can see towards the right, as we get through the frames, the bottom three have the aggregations happening and the top three.
There's still amoeba in there, amoeba in there but they're not that they're coalescing there and that's, that's those weren't the hotspots.
Any questions about those choices.
So you chose these after the experiment was over. So you, you, you let them grow and then you were like, okay, yes, these were aggregated these were they did.
Yeah, so we didn't do this blind.
We actually wanted to test post hoc, whether or not the, the cascade dynamic stuff that we've been talking about would, would find any difference in the relationship across different event sizes.
So yeah, so this was pre cooked, and we got this from the, from the generosity of David next at the molecular bio department at Yukon so.
So, yeah. Okay, so we did background regression of these multifractal dimensions across each of those frames. And so, just to jump to the punchline the fractality of larger events.
Promoted the fractality of smaller events at the aggregation sites and we got the reverse.
So, so, so, so this is sort of analogous to the executive function task with the card sorting, where we got we got the, the ultimate sort of outcome, or the, the, the task setting there at the outset was was showing us different sort of relationships between large events and
smaller events. And so what we're finding here is that the, the, the aggregation sites that we picked were characterized across those 540 frames by an exchange whereby the, the, the, the fractal dimensions at higher to were feeding down on the fractal dimensions
and the non aggregation sites had basically the small events feeding on the smaller events. And so this was just sort of a nice existence proof again that we just sort of that this seems to be tapping into anything about what's going on so we don't know for for sure.
Like we haven't manipulated this so we don't know that it's causal, but it's at least sort of a window to sort of to sort of start seeing what sort of swarm like relationships might be unfolding in this big, big distorted fluid system.
Any questions about that.
So that's, so the idea here is that I'm just, I, I'm a psychologist struggling with being also, you know, interested in swarms and seeing swarms where other people see single organisms.
And so, whether or not this is one organism or multiple organisms on the, on the right here.
It doesn't necessarily change how we model the emergence of adaptive response to context. So, all of these relationships that we'd seen before complicate simpler models, I would say, but then multi fractal structure is a nice way to start unpacking what exactly is going out like how, how embodiment and how interaction might unfold and how we can start to see it happen.
And so cascades are weight are are a sort of a geometrical framework to start looking into sort of what swarms, we might individually be as humans and then we can propagate that back to the organisms that we definitely think are all swarms.
So yeah, so multi fractality is just sort of an interesting way to operationalize that idea.
So that's all I've got. Thank you. And I'm sorry.